.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt LAS2LAND 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm las2land
.Nd extract land areas from lidar tiles
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op options
.Ar tile.las
.Op Ar tile.las ...
.Ar land.json
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
delineates land and water areas from a classified lidar point cloud.
Airborne lidar data exhibits voids in areas where surface water is present.
These voids are detected by triangulating the lidar point cloud; groups of large triangles are likely to indicate the presence of water.
Slope analysis of each group is performed to reject non-horizontal voids, which can occur in steep terrain.
Land polygons are formed from the outline of the remaining triangles.
.Pp
Input to the program is a list of lidar tiles in LAS format.
The tiles should share a common projected SRS, typically a UTM projection.
.Pp
The lidar tiles should be classified to indicate ground points.
Non-ground points are used in the triangulation, but not for analysis of flatness.
Spurious points, including low- and high-noise points
.Pq classes 7 and 18
and specular water reflections
.Pq class 9
are discarded.
.Pp
Output from the program is a polygon file in GeoJSON format, representing all land areas present in the lidar tiles.
Polygons conform to OGC standard, with non-self-intersecting rings and anticlockwise exteriors.
.Pp
A single
.Fl -width
or
.Fl -length
option is required to calibrate the void detection process.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width 6n
.It Fl w , -width Ar metres
Specify the minimum width of waterbodies to be detected.
The value should be comfortably larger than the linear point density of the lidar data.
Choose a value according to the scale you're working at.
.It Fl s , -slope Ar degrees
Set the maximum slope for a void area to be considered a potential waterbody.
Some leeway is required to accommodate situations such as steep-sided river banks.
Too lenient a value risks capturing non-water voids, such as steep cliffs, which can occlude a lidar sensor.
The default value of 10° works well in practice.
.It Fl a , -area Ar metres²
Set an area threshold for removal of small waterbodies and islands.
A sensible default value is used according to the minimum waterbody width.
.It Fl l , -length Ar metres
Specify a triangle threshold length, if desired.
Triangles larger than this threshold are added to potential water voids.
By default, a value the same as the minimum waterbody width is used, however a somewhat smaller value can be used to capture more detail.
.It Fl r , -water
Extract polygons for waterbodies instead of land areas.
Unexpected results may occur when using partly-covered tiles.
Contiguous tile sets are preferred.
.It Fl i , -simplify
Simplify the output polygons using Visvalingam's algorithm.
Simplified polygons may have self-intersections and are not guaranteed to be topologically valid, although this is rare.
.It Fl m , -smooth
Apply line smoothing to simplified polygons, rounding off any corners sharper than 15°.
This option is useful for visual applications such as maps.
.It Fl d , -discard Ar class,...
Choose a list of lidar point classes to discard.
The default value of 0,1,7,9,12,18 discards unclassified, overlap, water and noise points.
.It Fl e , -epsg Ar number
Specify an EPSG code to set in the output file.
This should be the same EPSG as the input data, since no reprojection occurs.
.It Fl t , -threads Ar number
Select the number of threads to use when processing.
Defaults to the number of available hardware threads.
.It Fl x , -tiles Ar tiles.txt
Provide a text file containing a list of lidar tiles to be processed, in place of command-line arguments.
.It Fl o , -overwrite
Allow the output file to be overwritten if it already exists.
.It Fl p , -progress
Show progress information while data is processed.
.It Fl v , -version
Show the program version.
.It Fl h , -help
Show a brief help summary.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -ohang
.It Process all lidar tiles in current directory:
.Dl $ las2land --width 8 *.las land.json
.It Process tiles from an input file list:
.Dl $ las2land --width 8 --tiles tiles.txt land.json
.It Tag output with an EPSG and pipe to another command for conversion:
.Dl $ las2land -w 8 -e 28355 *.las - | ogr2ogr land.shp /vsistdin/
.It Apply line smoothing:
.Dl $ las2land --width 8 --smooth *.las land.json
.It Use a smaller triangle length to keep finer detail:
.Dl $ las2land --width 12 --length 6 *.las land.json
.It Add So bridge deck Sc points Po class 17 Pc to water areas:
.Dl $ las2land --width 8 --discard 0,1,7,9,12,17,18 *.las land.json
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Matthew Hollingworth
